Unit test mocking (#100)
memfault/interrupt: _drafts/unit-test-mocking.md

---
title: Embedded C/C++ Unit Testing with Mocks
description:
  An overview of unit test mocking and integration tests for embedded software
  and firmware, using popular frameworks such as CppUTest, CppUMock, fff, and
  CMock.
author: tyler
tags: [better-firmware, unit-testing]
image: /img/unit-testing-mocking/cover.png
---

Writing a unit test from scratch for an embedded software project is almost
always an exercise in frustration, patience, and determination. This is because
of the constraints, as well as breadth, of embedded software. It combines
hardware drivers, operating systems, high-level software, and communication
protocols and stacks all within one software package and usually managed by a
single team. Due to these complexities, the number of dependencies of a single
file can quickly grow out of control.

> One tool that we can use to our advantage as embedded developers when writing

Reviewer: Maybe: paradigm or pattern?

```suggestion
One paradigm that we can use to our advantage as embedded developers when writing
```

embedded software project in C or C++ using CppUTest. We are going to jump
quickly into the content so it's best to have read that post first.

_Like Interrupt? [Subscribe](http://eepurl.com/gpRedv) to get our latest posts
straight to your mailbox_

{:.no_toc}

## Table of Contents

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
* auto-gen TOC:
{:toc}

## Stubs, Mocks, and Fakes Review

As a quick review, let's summarize the differences between **fakes**, **stubs**,
and **mocks**.

- **Fakes** are a working implementation, but usually substitute their
  dependencies with something simpler and easier for a test environment.
  Example: an in-memory key/value store vs a NOR-flash backed Key/Value store.
- **Stubs** are a trivial implementation that returns canned values, generally
  always returning valid or invalid values.
- **Mocks** are an implementation that is controlled by the unit test. They can
  be pre-programmed with return values, check values of arguments, and help
  verify that functions are called.

Each one serves a purpose in unit testing. Although each type might not be
utilized in every unit test you write, I can guarantee you that there's a place

> for them within the suite of tests for your firmware.

Reviewer: maybe:
```suggestion
for all of them within the suite of tests for your firmware.
```

the airbags have triggered or not. You _really_ would not want to have to test
this in QA every time you make a change.

Since mocks generally do not include any other dependencies, mocks are also the
best tool in the toolbox for isolating and testing every facet of the module
under test (strive for that 100% code coverage).

However, this strength is also a weakness. Using mocks everywhere becomes
cumbersome and verbose, given that every call, parameter, and return value has
to be explicitly defined or ignored. Everything in testing is a trade-off, and
choosing when to use mocks is no exception.

### When to Use Mocks

You should considering using a mock:

- When you only want to include single `.c` or `.cpp` source file under test.
- When you you need something more than a **stub**, but don't want to go through
  the trouble of modeling the subsystem behavior perfectly in a **fake**.
- When you have complex retry logic in a system and want to trigger every retry
  path.
- When you find yourself manually pre-programming return values while using a
  stub or a fake. I did this many times before finally understanding how to use
  a mock. I was doing something

>   [like this](https://gist.github.com/tyhoff/54efe99dbcd3cb22fa244159dd9bc42c).

Reviewer: For extra clarity might highlight the hand-made mock
```suggestion
  [like this](https://gist.github.com/tyhoff/54efe99dbcd3cb22fa244159dd9bc42c-L22-L33).
```

Author: Nice, I like it.

Although it's not a binary decision or suggestion, I find that to reach 100%
code coverage on my projects or in particular files, I commonly have to use
mocks. 100% code coverage means that every branch in the codebase was taken at
least once, which in turn means that every one of the `(buffer == NULL)`
branches needs to be taken.

With a **stub**, I can't change the return values dynamically. With a **fake**,
the implementation should be functionally accurate to the real module, so it
would usually never fail.

That leaves me with a **mock**!

## C/C++ Mocking Libraries

Here are the mocking libraries that I most commonly see used within embedded
projects.

- [CppUMock](https://cpputest.github.io/mocking_manual.html)
- [Fake Function Framework (fff)](https://github.com/meekrosoft/fff) - _Although

>   the name suggests it generates fakes implementations, they are actually mocks_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the name suggests it generates fakes implementations, they are actually mocks_.
```

- [CMock](http://www.throwtheswitch.org/cmock)

There is one other frequently mentioned mocking library,
[cmocka](https://cmocka.org/), but I don't often see it in the embedded space.

As with the unit testing framework itself, it **does not** matter what mocking
library you choose. As long as it plugs into your build system and it makes
sense to you, use it.

If I had to recommend which one you should use, I would say use CppUMock (and
CppUTest) if you are starting from scratch, and if you just want a mocking
library to hook into your already existing setup, go with fff.

### CppUMock

CppUMock is the mocking library that is included with
[CppUTest](https://cpputest.github.io/), the popular C/C++ unit testing
framework that was used within the book Test Driven Development for Embedded C
by James W. Grenning[^tdd_book]. This is also the framework I find myself
reaching for most often, as it is full-featured, works with both C and C++, and
is the most configurable.

> In the following example, we create a mock for `my_malloc` so that we can

Reviewer: Maybe:
```suggestion
In the following example, we create a mock for `my_malloc` which should be called by `allocate_buffer` so that we can
```

  // Set return value and expectation
  my_malloc_ExpectAndReturn(32, NULL);

  uint8_t *buf = allocate_buffer(32);

  // Validate expectations
  POINTERS_EQUAL(NULL, buf);

  // Get a real buffer we can write into
  void *real_buf = malloc(32);
  my_malloc_ExpectAndReturn(32, real_buf);
  uint8_t *buf = allocate_buffer(32);
  CHECK(buf != NULL);
}
```

The main reason I do not use the tools from ThrowTheSwitch is that they require
Ruby, and I haven't seen any significant number of embedded engineers or
projects in the wild using Ruby. With this in mind, I prefer to use other
frameworks and tools so that my team and I don't need to manage a Ruby
environment (alongside the usual GCC and Python environments).

## Real World Unit Test Example

Throughout this post, we are going to build a way for a remote system (such as
an iOS app) connected to the device over some transport (e.g. BLE or serial) to
be able to read and write key/value pairs to and from the device's internal file
system.

This is likely a system that most embedded engineers have either built or worked
with.

Below is a diagram of each piece in the system mentioned above.

> ![](/img/unit-testing-mocking/diagram.png)

Reviewer: Might call out that this diagram is our unit test stack (i.e "Fake NOR Flash" instead of just "NOR Flash") ... the previous paragraph had me thinking this was the actual system diagram

  $(UNITTEST_SRC_DIR)/test_kv_store.cpp
```

Notice we aren't including a bunch of RTOS source files or LittleFS modules, but
rather fakes and mocks of each of those. This way, we ensure that we are only
testing a single module and the test is as simple as possible.

With this in mind, we can start building some new modules and unit tests using
mocks.

We'll be building upon the [Unit Testing
Basics]({% post_url 2019-10-08-unit-testing-basics %}#real-world-unit-test-example)
example code. The green boxes shown above are modules we've already implemented
in the previous post, and the blue ones are the ones we'll be implementing
today.

Let's get started!

### Example Project Setup

If you want to follow along yourself, please reference the [Project CppUTest
Harness]({% post_url 2019-10-08-unit-testing-basics %}#project-cpputest-harness)
section from the previous post to get everything set up.

### Protocol Parser Background

The protocol we are going to make a parser for is very simple. Each message has
a **Command**, a payload **Size**, and a **Payload**.

![](/img/unit-testing-mocking/protocol.png)

We added the **command** field because we want to build a flexible protocol that

> can tell the device to do more things than just read and write key/value pairs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can tell the device to do more things than just read and write key/value ("kv") pairs.
```

  bool success = kv_store_write("hello", val_bytes, sizeof(val_bytes));
  CHECK_TRUE(success);

  // Push the raw bytes into our protocol
  size_t len = s_resp_buffer_len;
  eProtocolCode rv = protocol_handle(
      in_bytes, sizeof(in_bytes),
      s_resp_buffer, &len);

  // Ensure we receive the correct response!
  CHECK_EQUAL(kProtocolCode_Ok, rv);
  MEMCMP_EQUAL(val_bytes, s_resp_buffer, sizeof(val_bytes));
}
```

We are passing in a set of raw bytes into our protocol handler, and essentially
letting it run its course. This data flows in and out of **five** layers of
code, as shown in our diagram, and eventually returns data to our unit test with
`s_resp_buffer`. We confirm the data is correct using CppUTest's `MEMCMP_EQUAL`
operation.

Feel free to check out the
[source code on Github](https://github.com/memfault/interrupt/example/unit-testing/complex/tests/src/test_integration_protocol_kv_store.cpp)

> Do these integration tests give us the optimal 100% real-world test that QA or
> in-field testing provides? Of course not, but it gets us 90% of the way there
> which is infinitely better than nothing.

### Integration Tests in Practice

> This type of integration test can us embedded software developers a lot of bang

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This type of integration test can give us embedded software developers a lot of bang
```

#### Drawbacks

- Changing the API of a single commonly used module within integration tests
  will require updating all of those tests.
- They are susceptible to breaking in undefined ways since many source files are
  thrown into the same test.
- Integration tests are, in some ways, easier to write since they don't require
  new stub, fake, or mock files for each test that gets written. They might
  become the new normal, which would mean that each module would become less
  well tested and coverage of 100% might be more difficult to attain.

With the pros and cons taken into account, I can't argue with any amount of
testing, especially if it's fast, reliable, and tests the code in meaningful
ways. Even if I've battled a stale unit or integration test 2 years after it was
written, I reminded myself that I **would not** want to be testing it manually.

## Final Thoughts

I'm a believer that proper unit testing and integration testing can prevent many
of the firmware bugs that devices experience in the field. Except for the
firmware code that directly pokes in register values into hardware, all of the
software that goes into embedded software can and should be unit testing in some

> fashion.

Reviewer: Maybe: 

Could add some verbiage about others sharing how they've used unit tests and the "See anything you’d like to change? Submit a pull request or open an issue at Github" if you want

  higher level module.
- A Bluetooth socket implementation that is fed artfully crafted packed data to
  instrument protocols.

Mocks are especially useful when testing failure paths that would likely never
happen, or be disastrous if they did happen. For example, a mock would be a good
choice if you are writing a vehicle software module that behaves differently if
the airbags have triggered or not. You _really_ would not want to have to test
this in QA every time you make a change.

Since mocks generally do not include any other dependencies, mocks are also the
best tool in the toolbox for isolating and testing every facet of the module
under test (strive for that 100% code coverage).

However, this strength is also a weakness. Using mocks everywhere becomes
cumbersome and verbose, given that every call, parameter, and return value has
to be explicitly defined or ignored. Everything in testing is a trade-off, and
choosing when to use mocks is no exception.

### When to Use Mocks

You should considering using a mock:

- When you only want to include single `.c` or `.cpp` source file under test.
- When you feel you need something more control than a **stub** but less than a

>   **fake**.

Reviewer 2: When you need more than a stub, but don't want to go through the trouble of modeling subsystem behavior perfectly in a fake

- [Fake Function Framework (fff)](https://github.com/meekrosoft/fff) - _Although
  the name suggests it generates fakes implementations, they are actually mocks_
- [CMock](http://www.throwtheswitch.org/cmock)

There is one other frequently mentioned mocking library,
[cmocka](https://cmocka.org/), but I don't often see it in the embedded space.

As with the unit testing framework itself, it **does not** matter what mocking
library you choose. As long as it plugs into your build system and it makes
sense to you, use it.

If I had to recommend which one you should use, I would say use CppUMock (and
CppUTest) if you are starting from scratch, and if you just want a mocking
library to hook into your already existing setup, go with fff.

### CppUMock

CppUMock is the mocking library that is included with
[CppUTest](https://cpputest.github.io/), the popular C/C++ unit testing
framework that was used within the book Test Driven Development for Embedded C
by James W. Grenning[^tdd_book]. This is also the framework I find myself
reaching for most often, as it is full-featured, works with both C and C++, and
is the most configurable.

> 

Reviewer 2: Explain what you're about to do with your example

      .withParameter("size", size);

  if (mock().hasReturnValue()) {
    return mock().returnPointerValue();
  }

  // Actually return a real buffer if a return
  // value isn't set
  return malloc(size);
}

TEST(TestAllocateBuffer, Test_AllocateBufferBasic) {
  // Set return value
  mock()
      .expectOneCall("my_malloc")
      .withParameter("size", 32)
      .andReturnValue(NULL);

  uint8_t *buf = allocate_buffer(32);

  // Validate expectations
  mock().checkExpectations();
  POINTERS_EQUAL(NULL, buf);

  // Get a real buffer we can write into
  // No expected return value will pass us a real buffer
  mock()
      .expectOneCall("my_malloc")
      .withParameter("size", 32)
  uint8_t *buf = allocate_buffer(32);
  CHECK(buf != NULL);
}
```

Notice above that since we define the mock `my_malloc` ourselves, we can add
extra functionality to it, such as returning a real malloc buffer when the
programmer doesn't explicitly set it to return `NULL`. With other mocking
libraries, this isn't easily achieved and will require allocating a buffer
before and setting that as a return value.

Every library isn't perfect, and CppUMock isn't either. I have two issues with

> CppUMock. First, I feel it requires a level of verbosity I feel is unwarranted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CppUMock. First, it requires a good bit of boiler plate which leads to verbose unit testing code.
```

Where other libraries use macros to make things simpler and more concise,
CppUMock requires you to write everything by hand. And second, the documentation
leaves a lot to be desired, and I commonly find myself looking at the source
code for extra functionality that isn't documented.

### Fake Function Framework (fff)

> If you are wanting the simplest way to get started with mocking, then I suggest
> [Fake Function Framework (fff)](https://github.com/meekrosoft/fff)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Fake Function Framework (fff)](https://github.com/meekrosoft/fff) is the simplest way to get started with mocking.
```

  // Validate expectations
  LONGS_EQUAL(1, MOCK_my_malloc.call_count);
  LONGS_EQUAL(MOCK_my_malloc.arg0_val, 32);
  POINTERS_EQUAL(NULL, buf);

  // Get a real buffer we can write into
  void *real_buf = malloc(32);
  MOCK_my_malloc.return_value = real_buf;
  uint8_t *buf = allocate_buffer(32);
  CHECK(buf != NULL);
}
```

### CMock

CMock is a mocking library from the group behind
[ThrowTheSwitch.org](http://www.throwtheswitch.org/), which also makes the Unity
unit testing framework[^unity]. It is compatible with C and includes some
tooling around running and generating boilerplate for you given a set of header
files. The flow is similar to CppUMock in that you define your expectations
first and then call the implementation under test.

```c
TEST(TestAllocateBuffer, Test_AllocateBufferBasic) {
  // Set return value and expectation
  my_malloc_ExpectAndReturn(32, NULL);

  uint8_t *buf = allocate_buffer(32);

  // Validate expectations
  POINTERS_EQUAL(NULL, buf);

  // Get a real buffer we can write into
  void *real_buf = malloc(32);
  my_malloc_ExpectAndReturn(32, real_buf);
  uint8_t *buf = allocate_buffer(32);
  CHECK(buf != NULL);
}
```

> The unfortunate truth with the tools from ThrowTheSwitch is that most require
> Ruby, and I haven't seen any significant number of embedded engineers or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The main reason I do not use the tools from ThrowTheSwitch is that they require
Ruby, and I haven't seen any significant number of embedded engineers or
```
